Skip to main content
Scheme Highlights
SI No
Name
Service
1
Housing Scheme
To provide shelter to poor fisherfamily. Active fishermen of BPL category is considered for the programme and is implementing through district offices
2
Saving cum relief
Scheme
To promote thrift habit and to extend relief during lean period. The beneficiaries are registered fishermen of both marine and inland and the scheme is implementing through district offices.
3
Educational concession
To provide educational concession to the children of registered Non Hindu Fishermen and the scheme is implementing through district offices
4
Matsya Samrudhi
The project started on 2012 and is continuing. The project aims to increase inland fish production, to create new employment opportunities through development of inland and brackish water aquaculture and value addition of aquaculture products. The project is implementing in all 14 districts with the participation of Local Self Government
5
Insurance to fishing implements
To cover insurance coverage to traditional fishing implements. Registered traditional fishermen are the beneficiaries. The scheme is implementing through district offices& Matsyaboard
6
Pension to Fishermen
To provide an amount of Rs. 450/ per month as old age pension and widow pension. Registered fishermen/widows of fishermen are the benefiaries. The scheme is implementing through district offices& Matsyaboard
7
Group Insurance to Fishermen
To provide insurance coverage to active fishermen for death while at fishing. Registered active fishermen are the beneficiaries. The scheme is implementing through district offices& Matsyaboard
8
Group Insurance to
Allied workers
To provide insurance coverage to allied workers for accidental death. Allied workers are the beneficiaries. The scheme is implementing through district offices & Matsyaboard
9
Modernisation of Country crafts
To provide assistance for changing outboard motor. Members of cooperative societies affliated to Matysafed are the benefiaries. Scheme is implementing through Matysafed offices
10
Purchasing of fishing nets
To provide assistance to purchasing of fishing nets. Members of cooperative societies affliated to Matysafed are the benefiaries. Scheme is implementing through Matysafed offices
11
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY)
Enhnce ment of fish production. The project components are strengthening of Farms & Hatcheries,Diversifies aquaculture activities,promotion of sustainable ornamental fisheries, Integrated paddy fish culture. Infrastructure for post harvest and hygienic handling.
12
Kuttanad Package
For the development of Kuttanad area. Fish Farmers are the beneficiaries and the project is implementing by Dept. of Fisheries, FIRMA & ADAK.
13
Details of Fish/Shrimp hatchery and their installed capacity & production
To provide post larvae of shrimp and distribute to fish farmers
14
Sea rescue operations in nine districts &NFDB assisted project
Sea rescue operations. NFDB also assisted in developing reservoir fisheries, Training to farmers and Modernisation o markets.
15
Fisheries roads
To construct Fisheries roads near coastal areafor the benefit of fishermen. Implementing through district officers.
16
Drinking water supply
The project is implementing in marine districts to supply drinking water to fishermen
17
Sea Ranching
Ranching of shrimp and fish seeds to brackish water. Implementing through district offices
18
Ranching of open water bodies
Fish seeds and scampi are stocked in open water bodies. Implementing through district offices
19
Fisheries Dispensaries
Provide health services to fishermen. Implementing through DMO offices
20
Fisheries Schools
To provide education to students
21
Free ration
Provide ration to allied workers and boat workers
22
Services provided by FFDA
Assistance to fish farming in all 14 districts
23
Kerosene permit
Subsidy of kerosene to fishermen
24
Registration of Fishing vessels & Licensing
Online Registration of Fishing vessels & Licencing
Social Media
